---
title: 'Medicanes vs Hurricanes'
date: 2018-10-14
permalink: /posts/2018/10/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---

The risk assessment related to the formation of intense
tropical-like cyclones (TLC) or the so-called “Medicanes”
over the Mediterranean Sea is crucial in order to limit the
socioeconomic damages mostly in islands and coastal areas
(Michaelides et al., 2017). Even though cyclones that attain
characteristics of tropical cyclones in the Mediterranean is a
debatable issue, a Medicane can be defined as an intense,
maritime warm-core cyclone that forms in the Mediterranean
basin with a cloud-free eye formation and surface winds
above gale force. Very few studies exist so far regarding surface
or 3D observations of Medicanes and the main reason is
that these systems very rarely make landfall and thus, our
understanding of the role of deep convection within these
systems is limited to satellite retrievals. Lagouvardos et al.
(1999) investigated the case of a TLC between Sicily and
Greece in 1995 using infrared imagery and documented the
presence of deep convection (DC) prior to TLC genesis, as
well as the weak baroclinic instability contribution to the
evolution of the cyclone, by using a mesoscale model.
Luque et al. (2007) analysed satellite retrievals to construct
the trajectories of three Medicanes between 1995 and 2005
and estimated precipitation features from microwave measurements.
They concluded that the temporal evolution of
Medicanes consists of three stages: the pre-eye, the stationary
phase and the itinerant phase. Claud et al. (2010) used
NOAA/MetOp satellite observations to investigate three Medicanes and showed that convection and precipitation
areas are large in the early stage of the cyclones, but significantly
reduced afterwards. Convection maximum was found
just after the upper-level trough, located upstream of cold
mid-tropospheric air, when Medicanes reached their maximum
intensity. Miglietta et al. (2013) studied 14 TLC in the
Mediterranean and showed that deep convection, heavy rainfall
and intense lightning activity preceded the maximum
wind speed.
There is no common measure for the intensity of a
cyclone, yet it usually inferred in the literature as the period
when cyclones reach their minimum sea-level pressure
(SLP) or their maximum wind speeds (e.g., Claud et al.,
2010; Miglietta et al., 2013). Deep convection, rainfall and
latent heat release play a crucial role in the intensification of
tropical cyclones, as studies that use satellite techniques and
high resolution models, show around the globe (e.g., Homar
et al., 2003; Zagrodnik and Jiang, 2014). The source of
energy for tropical cyclones is the release of latent heat due
to condensation in moist convection. For developing tropical
storms, such convection is quite disorganized relative to the
cyclonic wind field. Nonetheless, a portion of the heat
released in these convective updrafts is transformed into
energy of two forms: the kinetic energy of the quasisymmetric
wind field and the convective available potential
energy associated with the warm core, which is necessary to
hold the cyclonic wind field in hydrostatic and gradient wind
balance. Even though studies show that typical baroclinic
cyclones in the Mediterranean basin present a similar life
cycle (Flaounas et al., 2015), Medicanes exhibit rather peculiar
characteristics, resembling TCs.


Medicanes vs Polar Lows
======
